Add developer getting started section and content (#814)
okteto/docs: src/content/get-started/advanced-commands-and-concepts.mdx

---
title: Advanced Commands & Concepts for Developers
description: Introduction to development concepts within Okteto
sidebar_label: Advanced Commands and Concepts
id: advanced-commands-and-concepts
---

import Image from '@theme/Image';

## Advanced CLI Commands

| Command          | Description                                                                                                                 |
| ---------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | okteto namespace | Allows you to deal with namespaces (create, delete, use).                                                                   |

Reviewer: Should we add links to the full docs of each command?

Reviewer 2: We can also do something like at the end of this section:

"If you want to learn more about any of these commands in details, checkout the complete [Okteto CLI reference](link)"

| okteto exec      | Allows you to execute a command in your development container. `okteto exec [devName] -- COMMAND`                           |
| okteto destroy   | Destroys a currently deployed Development Environment                                                                       |
| okteto logs      | Used to view the logs of a Development Environment                                                                          |
| okteto endpoints | Used to view your application’s HTTPS URLs automatically generated by Okteto                                                |

> | okteto doctor    | Generates a [doctor file](reference/okteto-cli.mdx#doctor) with the okteto logs for a given development container           |

Reviewer: I would mention `okteto doctor` is useful for asking for Okteto support
Also, `okteto status` is very useful for troubleshooting (by the user) issues with syncthing

### Commonly Used Flags

> - **`okteto deploy --dependencies`**: Installs dependencies defined in your okteto manifest

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **`okteto deploy --dependencies`**: Re-deploys dependencies defined in your okteto manifest
```

> - **`okteto deploy --build`**: Forces a rebuild of the images, incorporating any local changes

Reviewer: Since this is the default in CLI 3.0, I would mention it. Or make a note to update it once CLI 3.0 is out

Author: Will make note to update for CLI 3.0

- **`okteto build --no-cache`**: Do not use a cache when building an image
- `okteto destroy --volumes`: Destroy the persistent volumes created by the development environment. Persistent volumes are a storage resource that persists beyond the lifecycle of the Development Environment. This allows data to survive and be accessible by new Development Applications that may be created later. This could be useful for data for databases or application state while developing.
- `okteto destroy --all`: Destroy all Development Environments, including resources annotated with `dev.okteto.com/policy: keep`

> ## Important Concepts

Reviewer: If this doc is about "Advanced" concepts, I don't think important concepts go here

> ### [Namespaces](core/namespaces.mdx)

Reviewer: Links in titles feel weird. I would add the link in the paragraph

Author: Yeah agree. Thought it was useful but it looks weird, especially in dark mode

However, many developers prefer to use a single namespace as a replacement for their local environment. In this workflow, instead of creating a new namespace for each feature or bug fix, they switch branches within the same namespace to work on different tasks. This approach mirrors the traditional local development process and eliminates the need to reinitialize data for each new namespace.

When switching branches, it's important to ensure your environment is up-to-date. If your changes involve only code, running `okteto up` is sufficient to sync your changes. However, if the branches include changes to manifest files, you'll need to run `okteto deploy` to fully apply the updates.

This flexibility allows you to choose the workflow that best fits your development process, whether it's using separate namespaces for isolation or a single namespace for continuity and efficiency.

### [Development Environments](development/index.mdx)

> Development Environments enable developers to create applications in the cloud without having to worry about Kubernetes. Developers write code locally on their machine with the tools they love, and Okteto transparently updates their application on a cloud dev environment **in real-time as you code**!

Reviewer: Dev environment doesn't sync code, that's dev containers

Author: I had lifted this content directly from https://www.okteto.com/docs/development/. We should probably revisit that in a later PR to make sure that it's clear

> [Add states of dev environments and how to see their logs. The same applies to each service: how to see the logs, the meaning of the states, how to get the endpoints, …]

Reviewer: This seems incomplete content not ready to merge

### [Development Containers](development/containers/index.mdx)

> Development containers are essential for creating isolated and reproducible development environments. Definitions for the Containers look like docker-compose, but run in Kubernetes. Okteto supports two modes for development containers:

Reviewer: This first paragraph doesn't make to much sense. I think it's missing dev containers and dev environments concepts

Environment variables are useful for storing user-specific configuration values that are not shared with the rest of the team. They can also be useful when you need to specify ad-hoc variables at [the time of deployment](core/okteto-variables.mdx#deployment-variables).

### Okteto Preview Environments

Okteto's [Preview Environments](previews/index.mdx) automatically generate a unique, shareable version of your application for each pull request, making code reviews, automated end-to-end testing, and stakeholder feedback a breeze. [add language clarifying that platform team needs to set this up]

## FAQ

**When does `okteto deploy` look at the Git repo vs my own code?**

- `okteto deploy` uses the code from your Git repository to deploy the application. After running `okteto up`, Okteto’s file sync will update your changes remotely

**What’s the difference between `okteto up` and `okteto up --deploy`?**

- `okteto up` creates the Development Environment of a service based on its previously deployed version.
- `okteto up --deploy` runs the `okteto deploy` section first, picking up any new changes from the repository, and then connects to the Development Environment.

> **What does `okteto deploy --build` do?**

Reviewer: This will be the default in CLI 3.0

- This command forces a rebuild of the images, incorporating any local changes. It rebuilds all images, not just the ones with changes.

**What does the `--remote` flag do?**

> - Specifies that certain commands should be executed in the remote Development Environment instead of locally.

Reviewer: This is not accurate. Remote execution is explained here:
https://www.okteto.com/docs/core/remote-execution/
